# Networking

### About IP

- IP stands for internet protocol which is assigned to your computer so it can access the network.

- private IP is assigned for internal communication and public is for internet/external communication.

- static Ip ---> does not change at the time reboot 
- dynamic IP ---> changes after system reboot

```
# get the IP in Linux 
ifconfig
# new command
ip addr
```


### OS network components:

#### Network interface
 - A network interface is a point of interaction between a computer system and a network, enabling the system to send and receive data over that network. 
#### MAC address
 -  (Media Access Control) address is a unique identifier assigned to a network interface controller (NIC) for use in communications on the physical network segment.

#### Subnet mask
  - A subnet mask is a 32-bit number used in IPv4 network, Subnet masks are typically written in dotted-decimal notation. Example: 255.255.255.0


#### gateway
  - allowing communication between different networks. It typically connects a local network to external networks

#### DNS (Domain name system)
  - It translates human-readable domain names (like www.example.com) into machine-readable IP addresses (like 93.184.216.34)


### What is network manager?

 - A network manager is a software tool or system responsible for managing network resources, configurations, and connections within a computer network

```
systemctl status NetworkManager

```

```
ps -ef | grep network

```


### nmcli

  - nmcli is a command-line interface tool used for managing NetworkManager.

```
nmcli
nmcli connection status
nmcli connection show
nmcli connection show <connection-name>
nmcli connection up <connection-name>
nmcli connection down <connection-name>

```

### How to change IP address using nmcli

```
nmcli device
nmcli connection modify enpos3 ipv4.address 10.53.1.211/24
nmcli connection modify enpos3 ipv4.gateway 10.253.1.1
nmcli connection modify enpos3 ipv4.method manual
nmcli connection modify enpos3 ipv4.dns 8.8.8.8
nmcli connection up enpos3
nmcli connection down enpos3
nmcli connection show enpos3

```

### Adding secondary IP using nmcli

```
nmcli device status
nmcli connection show --active
ifconfig
nmcli connection modify enpos3 +ipv4.address 10.0.0.211.24
nmcli connection reload
systemctl reboot
ip address show

```



	

